
=head1 PROJECT

RPZLA translates as Response Policy Zone (RPZ) Log Analysis.  It is a first
effort to allow IT organisations to utilize the data gathered from an 
implementation of the RPZ features included in BIND 9.8.1 to enhance 
their organisation's security.

=head2 Licence

See the LICENCE.txt file (GPLv2).

=head2 Status

This project is under core development (pre-Alpha).

The first alpha release is expectecd by mid-summer (northern hemisphere) 2012.

=head2 Funding and Sponsorship

This project is funded by the generous donation of time by devoted,
private individuals.

The product of the project is freely available for the benefit 
of all.

=head2 Technology Background

Paul Vixie (L<http://www.isc.org>) implemented the first reputational
data based method of spam filtering.  This reputational method has 
become a useful method of spam protection.

With the release of BIND 9.8 a new reputational mechanism is available,
this time for use by DNS resolvers.  An organisation is able to 
receive a reputational data feed describing internet domains that
have a 'poor' reputation.  A poor reputation is usually based on
the delivery of malware.

The Internet Systems Consortium have provided an efficient standardised
mechanism for the use of reputational data by recursive DNS resolvers
and have left the provision of the reputational data itself to professional 
organisations that specialise in this type of information.  Additionally, the
response that shall be given to a client attempting to 
resolve a domain which is listed amongst those with a 'poor' reputation
is left to the local organisation to decide.

The response delivered will commonly be one of two alternatives.  The
first is an NXDOMAIN (no such domain) which is a simple black hole 
which prevents the client from reaching the domain with a poor reputation.
The second is to respond with a CNAME which will redirect the
client to a staged location designed to both collect information about
who has visited and also to inform them of the danger to which they
have been averted by visiting the site instead of the potentially 
dangerous domain.

This second (CNAME) based response is known in the RPZ literature as
a 'Walled Garden'.  The RPZLA project focusses on this approach and
integrating data gathered by both the DNS resolvers and visits to the
Walled Garden to allow distinguishment between human behaviour (more
precisely web browser behaviour) and malware behaviour.  The distinguishment
between the two and its value is discussed further below.

=head2 Purpose

If a recursive DNS resolver uses RPZ and records in its logs 
responses made based on RPZ data (i.e something asked for the 
DNS resolution of a domain with a known poor reputation) then that
data can be available for later analysis.  This tells us which 
client systems using the resolver are attempting to resolve domains 
with a poor repuation.

Additionally, if the organisation chooses to use a constant CNAME
(Walled Garden) strategy and visits to the walled garden are also
logged we can then correlate between the DNS logs and the Walled
Garden logs allowing us to differentiate between the 'human' type
behaviour of visiting a dangerous web site and other mechanisms
which involve the attempted resolution of a 'poor' domain but do
not then follow the CNAME redirection.  Both cases begin with a
request to resolve a domain with a poor reputation.  In the first
case the CNAME response is then followed and successfully communicates
with the Walled Garden web site generating a Walled Garden log as
well as the DNS log.  This is behaviour that would be
expected by a web browser, which in general implies a human using
the browser.  Note that any other process (e.g malware) which 
behaves entirely like a web browser will produce 'false positives'.
However, that 'false' is only the assumption that it is a human.
Something is still attempting to reach a potentially dangerous 
domain.  The second case produces only the DNS log as the 
software that requested the domain did then not follow the CNAME
response or did not successfully interact with the Walled Garden.
This, almost certainly, distinguishes the interaction as not 
involving a web browser, and thus indicates potential malware.

The RPZLA project attempts to make all of this DNS and Walled
Garden data easily available and to allow for easy distinction
between the two described cases.  This allows and organisation 
to easily identify client systems that are either being used 
by a person in a potentially dangerous manner, or are running
software without human interaction that wishes to contact 
potentially dangerous domains.

Additionally, the project wishes to ensure that data gathered
is stored in a manner which is simple and allows and organisation
to utilise that data easily according to their own wishes.

=head1 DETAILS

=head2 Architecture

The key elements to RPZLA are a collection of resolvers which are
implementing RPZs, a Walled Garden web-site, an RDBMS and a web site
(known as the analysis site in RPZLSA parlance) which allows the 
organisation to view the data delivered to the RDBMS from the 
resolvers and the Walled Garden.

See [Open Document Graphics] L<https://github.com/yesxorno/rpzla/raw/master/doc/Pictorial-Overview.odg>

=head2 Implementation

To allow analysis of the data from the DNS resolvers and the
Walled Garden, their log data must be delivered in a known format
and then 'watched' with the 'watchers' then collecting the 
relevant data to be shipped off to a central location (the RDBMS)
for storage.

Then, the analysis site can present any view of that data as 
wished for by the organisation.

Thus, the implementation is:

* a collection of data gatherers running on the DNS resolvers and Walled Garden which ship data to the RDBMS
* the analysis web site which queries that RDBMS and displays data as wished for by the organisation.

=head1 COMMUNITY

A community starts from one person.

=head1 REFERENCES

=item *

L<http://www.isc.org/files/TakingBackTheDNSrpz2.pdf>

=cut


